Roadmap to Learn Java
Start with the Overview of Java. Read some Java-related blogs and also research some Java-related things. For example read blogs on Introduction to Java, History of Java, Different Versions of Java, and also topics like Why Java is still so popular in 2022, etc., etc., and make a complete mind makeup to start your journey on Java. Make yourself self-motivated to learn Java and build some awesome projects using Java. Do it regularly and also start learning one by one new concept on Java. It will be very better to join some workshops or conferences on Java before you start your journey. 

1) Data Types and Variables
If Java is your 1st programming language then you should start learning the following concepts. 

Data Types in Java
Variables in Java
Rules for Naming a Variable in Java
What are Literals in Java
2) Features and Architecture
You need to learn some of the important features of Java programming language such as why java is secure, portable, object-oriented, robust, multithreaded, etc. along with the architecture like, how a Java program executes, what makes Java as a Platform independent language, etc. You need to cover the following concepts in this section. 

Compiler vs Interpreter
How Java is Platform Independent?
JVM Architecture
Features of Java
3) Operator and Expressions
Operators are used for performing operations on variables and values and they can be classified based on the functionality they provide. Some of the types are Arithmetic Operators, Unary Operators, Assignment Operators, Relational Operators, Logical Operators, etc. You need to cover the following concepts in this section. 

Arithmetic Operators and Expressions
Bitwise Operator – AND, OR & XOR
Bitwise Operator – Left Shift, Right Shift & NOT
Increment and Decrement Operators
Bit Masking and Merging
4) String Class
Strings in Java are Objects that are supported internally by a char array. Since arrays are immutable(cannot grow), Strings are immutable as well. Whenever a modification to a String is made, a completely new String is constructed. You need to cover the following concepts: 

Creating String Object
String Methods
String Matching with Regular Expression
5) Conditional Statements
In Java the following conditional statements are present and you need to cover all these concepts in detail. 

if statement
nested if statement
if-else statement
if-else-if statement
Switch Case Statement
6) Loops
Looping in programming languages is a feature that enables the implementation of a set of instructions repeatedly while some condition evaluates to true. Java provides 3 ways for executing the loops. While all the ways provide equivalent functionality, they vary in their syntax and condition checking time. In Java the following loops are present and you need to cover all these concepts in detail.

while loop
do-while loop
for loop
enhanced for loop
7) Arrays
The array is the collection of items stored at contiguous memory locations. The concept is to store multiple items of the same type together. This makes Array more straightforward to calculate the position of each element by just adding an offset to a base value, i.e., the memory location of the first element of the array. In Array, you need to learn the following concepts in detail. 


Arrays class in Java
1D Array
2D Array
8) Methods
The method is a collection of statements that accomplish some specific task and return the result to the caller. In Java, every method must be part of some class that is different from languages like C, C++, and Python. In Methods, you need to get in-depth knowledge of the following concepts. 

Writing Methods in Java
Passing Object as Parameters
Parameter Passing in Java
Variable Arguments
Command Line Arguments
Recursion
Method Overloading
9) Object-Oriented Programming (Most Important Concept in Java to Learn)
As the name suggests, Object-Oriented Programming or OOPs refers to languages that use objects in programming. Object-oriented programming aspires to execute real-world entities like abstraction, inheritance, data hiding, polymorphism, etc. in programming. The primary goal of OOP is to bind together the data and the functions that operate on them so that no other part of the code can access this data except that function. In Object-Oriented Programming, you need to learn the following concepts in detail. 

Principles of Object-Oriented Programming
Class vs Object
How to Write a Class
Constructor
Inheritance
Generalization vs Specialization
What’s inheritance?
Constructors in Inheritance
this is super
Types of Inheritance
Method Overriding
Dynamic Method Dispatch
Polymorphism using Overloading and Overriding
Abstract Class
What’s Abstract Class
Rules of Abstract Class
Interfaces
What are Interfaces
Example of Interface
Interface vs Multiple Inheritance
Inner Classes
Static Members and Blocks
Final Keyword
Exception Handling
What are Exceptions
How to Handle Exception
Try and Catch Block
Multiple & Nested Try Catch
Checked and Unchecked Exception
Throw vs Throws
Finally Block
To get more in-depth information about the OOPs concept click here.

10) Multithreading
Multithreading is a Java functionality that permits concurrent execution of two or more parts of a program for maximum utilization of CPU and every part of such a program is called a thread. In Multithreading, you need to learn the following concepts in detail. 

What are Multiprogramming
Multithreading using Thread Class
Multithreading using Runnable Interface
States of a Thread
Thread Priorities, Thread Class
Thread Methods: Constructors, sleep & Interrupt
Thread: Daemon, join and yield
What is Synchronization
What is a Monitor
Multithreading using Monitor
Inter-Thread Communication
To get more information about Multithreading click here.

11) JAVA IO Streams
Java provides different Streams with its I/O package that helps the user to accomplish all the input-output operations. These streams support all the types of objects, data types, characters, files, etc. to fully execute the I/O operations. In JAVA IO Streams, you need to learn the following concepts in detail. 

What are Streams
InputStream and OutputStream
FileOutputStream
FileInputStream & FileReader
Buffered Streams and Buffered Reader
Piped Streams
Random Access File
Data Streams
Serialization
12) Java Generics
Generics means parameterized types. The concept is to permit type (Integer, String, … etc., and user-defined types) to be a parameter to methods, classes, and interfaces. By using Generics, it is possible to create classes that operate with different data types. An entity such as class, interface, or method that operates on a parameterized type is a generic entity. In Generics, you need to learn the following concepts in detail. 

Introduction to Generics
Generic Methods
13) Collection Framework
Java Collection Framework is unlikely any group of individual objects that are described as a single unit is known as the collection of objects. Before in Java, there was no such thing defined that carries true for it so there arises a need in the next versions of any such concept. So in JDK 1.2, a different framework was defined known as “Collection Framework” that holds all the collection classes and interfaces in it. In Collection Framework, you need to learn the following concepts in detail. 

What are Collections?
Why Collections are Required?
Collection Classes in Java
HashMap and its Internal Working
HashSet, Treeset
Compare Interface
LinkedHashSet
BitSet
Arrays and Comparator
14) JDBC (Java Database Connectivity)
JDBC or Java Database Connectivity is a Java API to connect and execute the query with the database. It is a specification from Sun microsystems that provides a standard abstraction(API or Protocol) for java applications to communicate with various databases. In JDBC, you need to learn the following concepts in detail. 

JDBC Drivers
Writing JDBC Programming
DML (Data Manipulation Language) using JDBC
DDL (Data Definition Language) using JDBC
15) Java 8
Java 8 is one of the most awaited versions in the Java programming language because of its important feature release. So one must know about those Java 8 features and is very very important to learn and practice. In Java 8, you need to learn the following concepts in detail. 

Lambda Expressions
Syntax
Rules for writing lambda expressions
Introduction to Lambda Expression
Parameters in Lambda Expression
Method Reference
Functional Interfaces
Default Methods
Java 8 Streams
Java 8 Date/Time API Changes
